---
title: "About the Author"
date: 2018-06-24
menu:
  main:
    name: Author
    weight: 20
---

Robert James Joy (aka Rob Miller) is not a licensed psychotherapist. He makes
his living as he has for the last two decades: writing software. While he's
always had an interest in self improvement, he has not always been interested
in the study of psychological theory and practice. In 2011, he fell in love
with [a woman](http://lisapetrastherapy.com/) who was, at the time, finishing
her internship towards becoming a Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist with
the California Board of Behavioral Sciences. As he and Lisa grew more
connected, he started to learn from her about the fundamentals of
psychology. He supplemented this with his own reading, with conversations and
connections with other among their shared community of licensed therapists, and
with his own personal therapy.

One thing he discovered from spending time among all of these therapist types
is that they often understood themselves and each other in ways that they took
for granted, but which he found to be foreign and fascinating. In dealing with
the inevitable challenges of relationship, he began to see how these models
were quite valuable, providing frameworks for understanding that helped lessen
defenses and which led to more and deeper connection. He began individual
therapy, which further deepened his understandings, and allowed him to connect
them to his lived experience. And likewise he found having some familiarity
with the conceptual framework caused his therapy to be more effective than it
would have otherwise; he could get "on board" as a more active participant in
the process.

At some point he started whimsically referring to himself as "therapish", to
express that he was interested in and somewhat familiar with psychology and
psychotherapeutic practices without actually being a practitioner himself. As
he grew more interested in these topics, and found more tangible personal
benefit from what he learned, he began to wish that more people had a basic
understanding of these ideas so they could also experience the benefits he was
experiencing. This site is his attempt to share this interest and these
benefits with you.

