---
title: "About Therapish"
date: 2018-06-08
menu:
  main:
    name: About
    weight: 10
---

Wikipedia (as of writing this, anyway) defines
[psychology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psychology) as "the science of
behavior and mind... as well as feeling and thought." Behavior and mind and
feeling and thought... that's a *lot* of territory. That covers most of human
lived experience. All of your joy, sadness, pleasure, pain, fun, boredom,
ideas, stories, and actions fit in there. A younger me wasn't particularly
interested in learning about psychology, but I feel a bit embarrassed about
that now. I think psychology is one of the most valuable and underappreciated
topics of study. What could be more useful than learning about how I work?
About why I think these thoughts, why I feel those feelings, why I do these
things?

It's not possible to answer these questions completely, of course, neither in
general nor in any specific case. Psychology is not an exact science, nor even
always a consistent one. But still, a large number of very smart people have
spent many years experimenting, studying, watching, and communicating about
humans and their behaviors and their experiences. And there is much to gain
from exploring alongside them, from turning our gaze toward ourselves, each
other, and the ways that we relate to one another.

The Therapish project rises from two basic premises. The first is that learning
about psychology is pragmatically useful. Studying the human psyche is not just
an academic exercise; many of the concepts we'll explore can be seen and
experienced in our own lives, often providing valuable insights into our
behaviors and our relationships.

The second premise is that learning about psychology is fun. Psychology
contains, to put it bluntly, some weird shit. There are well documented
phenomena that seem so strange and unlikely that they can be hard to
swallow. The mechanisms by which some of these phenomena operate are not always
well understood. But they happen, and they impact us every day in very real
ways, and they are truly fascinating. My earnest hope is that you'll find these
ideas as interesting and as useful as I have.
