---
title: "An Inquiry Into \"Self\""
date: 2018-08-10T18:17:41-07:00
draft: true
---

Most people use the word "myself" with some regularity. We think of ourselves
as having certain traits, which together make up a sense of what we call
identity. "I'm outgoing and friendly, but inside I tend to often feel a bit
anxious. I'm ambitious, but sometimes lack discipline. I'm usually thoughtful
and deliberate, but occasionally I can be spontaneous and impulsive." It
sometimes can seem as though we have an unending supply of stories about
ourselves. But what is this "self" that we're speaking of, anyway?

This question has caused various mystics and philosophers to chase themselves
around conceptual trees throughout all of human history. Attempting to reckon
with the nature of self is a central theme to Eastern religions such as
Buddhism and Taoism. All of psychology can be thought of as an attempt to
understand the concept and workings of self. While it can be fruitful to
meditate deeply on the elusive essence of self, for our purposes today we'd
rather make a best effort attempt to describe what we mean by "self" in
relatively simple language.

We will define "self" as a structure of sentience or consciousness that is tied
to a specific body, which inhabits and animates that body, and which gives rise
to a sense of conceptual continuity within that body. It is a center of
sensation and thought and feeling, capable of perceiving and reacting to and
impacting the world within which it exists.

Human infants do not yet have a self in the way that we mean. They have a
sentience, and they have perceptions and sensations, but they do not have the
thought structures nor the sense of continuous identity that exist in
adults. Our adult selves must be grown within us, formed on top of the
infantile sentience, out of the raw materials of our environments as they are
experienced over time. Selves are developed in reaction to that which we
perceive. Selves develop in relation to that which our nervous system comes to
understand as "other".

An interesting thought experiment can be to imagine the lived experience of an
infant. I imagine it to be an unformed wash of sensations. There are colors and
sounds and tactile feelings, undifferentiated, uncategorized. Eventually some
of these sensations repeat enough times to cause a coherence in our
relationship to them. In most cases, a particular set of sights and sounds and
smells and feelings slowly consolidate into what we eventually learn to call
"mama". Usually there is another caregiver who similarly starts to take form,
most often a father.

There are other "others" out there in the world, of course. Chairs, plants,
pets, doors, clothes, rocks, anything that we have an experience of that we can
tell is not part of "me". But none of these have a self, or at least not a
human self, the way that we do, and so none of these are as impactful in the
development of our own selves. We are hard wired to bond with and "attach" to
our caregivers, often referred to in psychology as "primary attachment
figures". Our sense of self is literally constructed out of our relationship to
and experience of these attachment figures.

Given this, it's no wonder that it's a clich√© how psychologists and
psychotherapists are so very interested in a client's relationship to their
parents. The key to understanding the workings of an adult self is
understanding the others from which that self was constructed, and how the
experience of those others supported (or not) that construction. So much of
what you understand to be "you" is the result of your unformed self trying to
make sense its experience of its caregivers, and trying to figure out how best
to get those caregivers to continue to give the care upon which the vulnerable
infant depends.
