---
title: "Object Constancy"
date: 2018-08-11T11:30:06-07:00
draft: true
---

As discussed previously, [object permanence]({{< relref "object_permanence.md"
>}}) refers to the ability to know that a thing continues to exist even when it
is not being perceived. Often confused with object permanence is the related
but subtly different idea of "object constancy", which moves beyond recognition
of an object's permanent existence and on to an understanding that a single
object can contain a multitude of (sometimes disparate) traits. Knowing that a
book still exists even though it's hidden behind my back demonstrates object
permanence; knowing that the book is the same object whether you're seeing it
standing vertically on the shelf or laying on the floor with the pages splayed
open demonstrates object constancy.

When psychologists speak of object constancy, however, books are not usually
the objects they have in mind. The objects that have the most impact on our
human development are people, specifically our parents or primary
caregivers. This is not terribly surprising, especially when you consider the
abject helplessness of the human infant. Our survival is *completely* dependent
on our caregivers, so we are hard wired to a) figure out who they are and b)
bond with or "attach to" them as effectively as possible.

Realizing the constancy of a parent figure does not happen all at once. Our
experience of a caregiver is made up of a number of often dissimilar phenomena.
A newborn infant might experience breastfeeding, with its soft touches and
warmth and nourishing sweetness. Later there might be an experience of being
tickled, made up of the tactile experience of the fingers and the resultant
reflexive laughter response. The child will develop a relationship to each of
these experiences, but it may not put it together that one single "Mama" object
is behind both of those experiences.

Another axis of object constancy is that one object can generate both
gratifying and frustrating experiences. Imagine a mother with one breast that
produces an abundance of milk, while the other underproduces. An infant may
initially experience these as two separate objects: "good breast", to which the
child has a positive response; and "bad breast", to which the child develops an
aversion.

In healthy development, this gets resolved. The good breast and the bad breast
are joined as we come to realize that a constant mother object contains both.
This process is central to the work of early psychoanalyst
[Margaret Mahler's](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Margaret_Mahler), who
describes a further process where the child, having realized the mother exists
outside of self, develops an "internalization", or internal representation, of
that mother. Internalization is very important to an infant's well being. The
internalized mother object provides a level of safety, support, and reassurance
to the baby, supporting a higher capacity for tolerating challenges and
discomfort as it moves through its world.

Development is not always healthy, unfortunately. For instance, if a parent
intermingles abuse with the necessary acts of care required for keeping a baby
alive, that baby will have a very hard time reconciling those experiences and
recognizing that one entity is responsible for both the nurture and the
torture. This lack of an attachment figure's object constancy can have long
lasting effects, possibly leading to an adult who has a hard time seeing others
in all their fullness. This person will tend to experience those around them as
either all good (idealization) or all bad (vilification). They might move the
same person back and forth (sometimes with dizzying speed!) between being all
good or all bad, but they will have a hard time having a nuanced experience of
another person, containing both positive and negative traits.

A parent figure's lack of object constancy also impacts the internalization of
that parent figure. The internal representation that the child carries around
will also be fragmented, and it will not as effectively provide the child with
a sense of support and security. A child so deprived of this resource will
likely grow into an adult who feels a heightened fear of abandonment,
ultimately unsafe and alone in the world.

With this in mind it's not surprising that object constancy issues are thought
to be linked to what is called "borderline" behavior. Among the symptoms of
[Borderline Personality Disorder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borderline_personality_disorder#Signs_and_symptoms)
are disturbed sense of identity, extreme reactions to real or imagined
abandonment, "black and white" thinking, and uncontrollable emotional reactions
that seem disproportionate to an event or situation. It's as though the folks
with a healthy sense of object constancy are always carrying their mother
around with them, holding them and whispering words of encouragement and
safety, allowing them to tolerate aloneness. The poor souls with impaired
object constancy don't have their mama inside them, and are terrified of being
left profoundly alone in the universe.
