---
title: "Object Permanence"
date: 2018-08-11T11:30:06-07:00
draft: true
---

In our brief exploration of [the essence and formation of self]({{< relref
"inquiry_into_self.md" >}}), we touched on how a self (a "subject") is only
developed in relation to that which is perceived to be other ("objects"). As we
experience the same or similar sensory impressions, again and again, we start
to realize that a particular bundle of sensations (sights, smells, sounds,
tastes, and tactile feelings) are generated by a single other, a single object,
that persists over time, even when we are not perceiving it. This development
is called the onset of "object permanence".

A canonical example mentioned when object permanence is being discussed is that
of a baby's delight at the game peek-a-boo. Peek-a-boo doesn't work on a
newborn, who doesn't yet have a fully developed relationship to the experience
of the "other" attached to a human face. Nor does it work on an older child,
who understands that the face is attached to a body, which has arms and hands,
and that the hands are in front of the face, but the face is still
there. Peek-a-boo works on those old enough to express delight when looking at
a friendly face, but young enough to wonder where the face went when it can no
longer be seen; they are delighted anew each time it reappears.

There is no consensus on exactly when humans develop object permanence. The
prominent Swiss psychologist
[Jean Piaget](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean_Piaget) claimed that it began
to develop at eight to twelve months, but
[recent studies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object_permanence#Contradicting_evidence)
have shown that it may exist in children as young as three months old. Future
developments in pre- and perinatal psychology may show that it begins to
develop even before birth.

Similarly, we don't know all of the details about how it develops. It seems
likely to be some combination of neural development of the frontal cortex,
informed by a sensory feedback loop of an infant's interaction with their
environment. But that leaves many unresolved questions: Does it develop over a
period of days, weeks, or months? Does it develop in specific stages? What
might interfere with its development? The PubMed database lists
[over 100
papers](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=(%22object%20permanence%22%20AND%20Humans%5BMesh%5D))
related to object permanence in humans (and more in other species) for readers
interested in learning more about studies and thinking on this topic.

Object permanence *does* develop, regardless of when and how. An adult human
with no sense of object permanence wouldn't be able to function. Some suspect,
however, that it may not develop equally smoothly for everyone. My partner, a
licensed therapist who worked in community mental health for a number of years,
learned from a mentor that individuals who tend towards psychosis often have
behaviors that hint at a tenuous sense of object permanence. She learned to
watch for clients who would avidly "take in" the surroundings of her office
every time they entered, as if to ascertain whether or not they had been there
before. They would often be hyper-aware if anything had changed... "Was that
picture always on that desk?"

The implication here is that these clients' sense of the permanence of the
environment might be impaired. Every time they entered her office, they were
trying to establish whether this was indeed the place they had been before, or
if somehow it were fundamentally different. Consistency is very desirable with
such clients, so she would work to ensure they could always meet at the same
time, on the same day(s), to build a container of safety, a reality that could
be trusted.

Object permanence is often confused with the related but distinct concept of
["object constancy"]({{< relref "object_constancy.md" >}}).
